Once three decades ago in my tender and terrible boyhood, I had the occasion of
seeing a man in the act of making contact with God. I had wandered into the so called
Rose Court at the back of the Ducal Chapel in my native, during an interval
in hymnal practice. As I mooned there, lifting and cooling my bare calves by turns
against a smooth column, I could hear the distant sweet voices interblending in
subdued boyish merriment which some chance grudge, some jealous annoyance with
one particular lad, prevented me from joining. The sound of rapid steps made me raise
my morose gaze from the sectile mosaic of the court - realistic rose petals cut out of
rodstein and large, almost palpable thorns cut out of green marble. Into these roses
and thorns there walked a black shadow: a tall, pale, long nosed dark haired young
minister whom I had seen around once or twice strode out of the vestry and without
seeing me stopped in the middle of the court. Guilty disgust contorted his thin lips. He
wore spectacles. His chenched hands seemed to be gripping invisible prison bars. But
there is no bound to the measure of grace which man may be able to receive. All at
once his look changed to one of rapture and reverence.
How glad I was that the vigils I had kept all through the spring had 
prepared me to observe him at his miraculous midsummer task! I had learned exactly
when and where to find the best points from which to follow the contours of his
inspiration. My binoculars would seek him out and focus upon him from afar in his
various places of labor at night, in the violet glow of his upstairs study where a
kindly mirror reflected for me his hunched up shoulders and the pencil with which he
kept picking his ear inspecting now and then the lead, and even tasting it; in the
forenoon, lurking in the ruptured shadows of his first-floor study where a bright
goblet of liquor quietly traveled from filing cabinet to lectern, and from lectern to
bookshelf, there to hide if need be behind Dante's bust; on a hot day, among the vines
of a small arborlike portico, through the garlands of which I could glimpse a stretch of
oilcloth, his elbow upon it, and the plump cherubic fist propping and crimpling his
temple. Incidents of perspective and lighting, interference by framework or leaves,
usually deprived me of a clear view of his face and perhaps nature arranged it that
way so as to conceal from a possible predator the mysteries of generation; but
sometimes when the poet paced back and forth across his lawn, or sat down for a
moment on the bench at the end of it, or paused under his favorite hickory tree, I
could distinguish the expression of passionate interest, rapture and reverence, with
which he followed the images wording themselves in his mind, and I knew that
whatever my agnostic friend might say in denial, at that moment Our Lord was with
him. 